Revised IPC Implementation: Reference Document (#5016)
tock/tock: doc/reference/trd-interprocess-communication.md

does not restrain communication patterns after initiation. Both client requests
and asynchronous server notifications are supported in communication mechanisms.

### 1.3 Security

Two primary security models were in mind for this IPC design. The first is
a system without security concerns. While this is a trivial case, it does
include most development of Tock, Tock tutorials, and Tock for use as a research
platform. In this system, processes are trusted to not impersonate other
processes or intentionally deny service to other processes.

The other security model in ind is a system where all apps are signed by a
single developer and checked before being loaded. In this case, all applications
running on the system have been confirmed by the developer (either as a group or
individually). In practice, this has similar expectations for processes, where
they can be trusted to not impersonate other processes or intentionally deny
services.

A model not immediately targeted by this design is the "app store model" where
apps signed by multiple developers coexist on a single platform. In this case,
these apps can only be partially trusted for good behavior. They could

> impersonate other processes or deny service to other processes.

Reviewer: I've been thinking about this since looking at the code, and this feels like playing too safe. We have this fantastic AppId infrastructure no other embedded OS has, and I think we should design it into the system. Even if it isn't implemented with IPC right now, I would like to understand how someone would integrate it, and we definitely don't want to start from scratch with a third IPC mechanism.

I don't completely agree that Tock tutorials are based on security-off designs. We have tutorials which extensively use AppId and require signed applications and implement different policies based on the trust from the signatures.

I don't think we need to get to allowing _apps_ to enforce trust at this point. But, I do think we need to have a plan for how the kernel can enforce trust. Probably the simplest example of this is having the kernel enforce that an app registering as a service is actually allowed to. Then the kernel guarantees that apps subscribing know they aren't subscribing to an impersonator. Also, that the kernel can restrict which apps are allowed to register certain identifiers.

Author: > Even if it isn't implemented with IPC right now, I would like to understand how someone would integrate it, and we definitely don't want to start from scratch with a third IPC mechanism.

We did leave space for it even if it's not implemented. **Server validation** is significantly more straightforward to implement.

1. Create a new IPC Registry capsule (IPC Registry AppID or something)
2. While registration _could_ have been a synchronous process, we intentionally made it asynchronous so a kernel validation step could occur. There are comments for where registration would be inserted into the flow.

```
    fn register(&self, processid: ProcessId) -> Result<(), ErrorCode> {
        // If registration validation is desired, that would go here before
        // saving the name

        // Ensure that a package name field exists
        if !self.kernel.process_map_or_external(
```

3. The hard part is actually doing the validation. I'm not actually sure how to have "the kernel enforce that an app registering as a service is actually allowed to", although that sounds great. I suspect that the systems you built are already capable of it, or at least close to capable of it. The board might also have to specify something about which service identifiers are valid, or which requirements are necessary to fulfill to register for one.

4. Nothing else should need to change. Discovery could still be unvalidated and be based on whatever field you like. Communication relies on getting an IPC Identifier, and that would all still work.

---

**Client validation** is quite a bit tougher. Since an IPC Identifier is forgeable right now, even if the IPC Registry did client validation it wouldn't actually be a guarantee that only validated clients are communicating with a service. Instead, we'd need some kind of [Process Descriptor Table](https://github.com/tock/tock/blob/dev/ipc-reference-document/doc/reference/trd-interprocess-communication.md#22-potential-alternative-designs) implementation, which the reference document talks about.

I believe that the IPC Identifier type could still be used for that. It would internally be replaced with an integer value referencing a process's own internal table. I'll admit that isn't as well thought through, and it's likely some other changes would also be necessary. For example, comparing two IPC Identifiers for equality is possible now, but wouldn't be if they pointed to Process Descriptor Tables, unless they also stored the ProcessID they came from. But then creating them from a 64-bit number wouldn't be possible without also including the ProcessID it came from.

I do think the hard part would be handling memory for a Process Descriptor Table and that the IPC Identifier changes would be relatively straightforward from there, but I also suspect it would spiral to little changes all over the IPC ecosystem, rather than being self-contained.

Reviewer: Is it possible to have an `IpcRegister` trait?

I think we have two options:
1. Filter at the syscall layer. We have a trait for this. But this would prevent any logic on the IPC-specific info (eg the registered name). It is also hard if there are going to be multiple driver numbers that support register.
2. Have some trait that boards can use to restrict registration.

What is beneficial about both of these is boards can implement the policy they want. Editing the registry capsule itself is awkward.

Reviewer 2: > I don't think we need to get to allowing _apps_ to enforce trust at this point. But, I do think we need to have a plan for how the kernel can enforce trust. Probably the simplest example of this is having the kernel enforce that an app registering as a service is actually allowed to. Then the kernel guarantees that apps subscribing know they aren't subscribing to an impersonator. Also, that the kernel can restrict which apps are allowed to register certain identifiers.

That's still not enough to support the "secure app offload" use case in the threat model, because in that case the kernel doesn't know when apps should be allowed to register certain identifiers.

A registry capsule that works with application IDs would support that model while fitting into this design well. But, as-is, I think we have to do one of:

1. Change the threat model to remove the requirement to support the secure app offload case.
2. Add the application ID registry capsule to the design now so it's compliant with the threat model.

Author: > That's still not enough to support the "secure app offload" use case in the threat model, because in that case the kernel doesn't know when apps should be allowed to register certain identifiers.

> A registry capsule that works with application IDs would support that model while fitting into this design well.

I'm missing something here. Couldn't the kernel look at the Application IDs to determine when apps should be allowed to register certain identifiers? Well, really I mean the Board file in conjunction with the kernel. That would work with the second of the two methods that Brad mentions above.

Author: > 1. Filter at the syscall layer. We have a trait for this. But this would prevent any logic on the IPC-specific info (eg the registered name). It is also hard if there are going to be multiple driver numbers that support register.

This is a really interesting idea. Until you'd mentioned it in the Userspace Services PR, I hadn't considered that option at all. I think this would work, although if you have multiple IPC Servers, nothing would stop one from impersonating the other.

There's just the one "register" command. There are multiple driver numbers, but that's still just one if statement with an "and", right? Heck, less in practice since the Board file knows which IPC Registry it's using.

> 2. Have some trait that boards can use to restrict registration.

Does it need to be a trait? Again, the board knows exactly which IPC Registry it's using.

I was considering a design where the board passes a validation function handle into the IPC Registry. Implementation thoughts: I split registration into two functions, start and finish. Then instantiating an IPC Registry takes an `Option<ValidationFunction>` which would have the signature `ValidationFunction(processid: ProcessID, name: &[u8], call_when_done: RegistrationResultFunction) -> Result<(), ErrorCode>` and `RegistrationResultFunction` would be the finish function of registration.

Reviewer 2: > > That's still not enough to support the "secure app offload" use case in the threat model, because in that case the kernel doesn't know when apps should be allowed to register certain identifiers.
> 
> [...]
> 
> I'm missing something here. Couldn't the kernel look at the Application IDs to determine when apps should be allowed to register certain identifiers? Well, really I mean the Board file in conjunction with the kernel. That would work with the second of the two methods that Brad mentions above.

I don't see how that would work. Like, it seems like the kernel would need to have a function along the lines of:

```rust
/// Returns true if this app can register as service_name, false otherwise.
fn can_register(app_id: &[u8], service_name: &[u8]) -> bool;
```

But how can that be implemented? The obvious idea is a permission list (app 1 can register name A, app 2 can register name B, etc), but who can make that list?

* The vendor of the Tock OS image: No, because they don't know what apps might exist (and they shouldn't be gatekeeping apps added after the image is added).
* The phone OSes app stores: these shouldn't be trusted for a secure element (they're not in the trusted compute base). Plus there can be multiple app stores, sideloaded apps (development has to happen somehow), etc.
* The application developers: They can vouch for themselves, but they don't trust each other.

The only idea I have is if the service name is derived from the app ID, but neither the package name registry nor the string name registry do that. I did, however, miss the following paragraph from section 3.3 ("Other Potential Registry Designs") on my previous read:

> Registration and discovery by AppID seems reasonable. That could allow for an "app store" type model, where it's possible to discover one of several versions of a service by a single vendor.

I believe that would work, yes.

Author: @bradjc What do you think about this validation implementation? https://github.com/tock/tock/commit/300ebc84613daf872554d95002145c666357abb8

Alternatively, I could make the Registry capsules sit on top of an Optional IpcServiceValidator trait, which would be in charge of the validation.

I'm not really sure how the validation itself would be implemented. Do we think a function in the board is going to be sufficient? Or would it be a capsule (or some struct in the kernel)?

Author: As discussed on the call today, here's a possible route for implementing services that could come from multiple separate authorities:

Create a new IPC Registry which takes a key and validates that the service app was signed with that key in order to discover it. (i.e., "I want to discover a service from the authority with this key") This could be in addition to some string name.

In this case, the client would have a public key for the authority that it trusts.

I reviewed https://book.tockos.org/doc/threat_model/secure_app_offload#ipc and this explanation matches up with it.

Author: Checking in on this discussion. I don't think I have any action items right now for resolving it.

I believe the existing design could allow for new registries to be created that base their decisions on AppID.

For validation with existing systems, I believe we could either provide a validation function (as demonstrated in https://github.com/tock/tock/commit/300ebc84613daf872554d95002145c666357abb8) to registries or provided a validator capsule that registries could sit on top of. Both of those would require modifications to registry code, but in a fairly simple manner.

Syscall filtering could also be used without modification to existing code, although it's not clear to me that it offers true promises in the case of multiple services, as it can't stop one from impersonating the other.

Reviewer 2: TL;DR: Okay, I think this is fine as-is.

The threat model [says](https://book.tockos.org/doc/threat_model/threat_model#isolation-provided-to-processes):

> A process' data may not be accessed by other processes or by capsules, unless explicitly permitted by the process.

I had my own idea of what "explicitly permitted by the process" means, but in retrospect that idea is not backed up by the threat model. If a process wants to send data to "whatever process registered service name ABC", then that seems okay with the threat model as written.

I previously wrote:

> A registry capsule that works with application IDs would support that model while fitting into this design well. But, as-is, I think we have to do one of:
>
> 1. Change the threat model to remove the requirement to support the secure app offload case.
> 2. Add the application ID registry capsule to the design now so it's compliant with the threat model.

This was incorrect: as-is, the threat model does *not* require Tock capsules and systems to support the secure app offload threat model, so no changes are needed to support this TRD as-is.

So I think the design is okay as-is, especially because it has the extensibility needed for an out-of-tree user to support the secure app offload case.

Reviewer: Sorry, I should have responded to this. The validation function is roughly what I'm thinking; here is my attempt: #5089. I would prefer to parallel our other filters (eg `SyscallFilter`).

64-bit value has a single IPC Identifier it corresponds to. Userspace can
always treat an IPC Identifier as an unsigned 64-bit integer. This can be split
into two 32-bit halves (upper and lower) for transmission through syscalls and
upcalls.

Typically userspace gets an IPC Identifier via an IPC Registry capsule as part
of the discovery process. This is not a hard requirement, however, and it's
possible for processes to receive IPC Identifiers through other means.

Within the kernel, an IPC Identifier can be generated from a 64-bit value
provided from userspace or directly from a given ProcessId. Capsules should also
treat IPC Identifiers as opaque handles, and their internal implementation is
subject to change.

IPC Identifiers are tied to the lifetime of the currently running process,
rather than a given application. If the process restarts, its IPC Identifier
MUST change. Communication destined for the original IPC Identifier will fail,
which has the benefit of signaling that the interaction needs to be restarted
entirely.

### 2.1 Current Implementation

The current implementation of IPC Identifier is found in

> [capsules/extra/src/ipc/ipc_identifier.rs](../../capsules/extra/src/ipc/ipc_identifier.rs)

Reviewer 3: This link seems to be broken.

Author: Fixed. Thanks!

Internally, it uses a combination of ProcessID and ShortID to identify a
process. The combination of the two of these uniquely identify an application
and a process instance, which fit the implementation requirements of IPC
Identifier.

The ID number of a process ProcessID is a 32-bit, monotonically increasing
number assigned to a process when it starts. It already changes each time the
application restarts.

The ShortID is a 32-bit number assigned to an application, which is constant
across restarts of the application. However, for many boards, the ShortID is set
to LocallyUnique, which maps to a value of 0.

Particularly given the structure inherent to the current implementation, be
aware that IPC Identifiers are forgeable. It's possible for a client to guess at
IPC Identifiers for existing processes. So simply knowing an IPC Identifier
should not be used as proof that access has been previously validated.

### 2.2 Potential Alternative Designs

One remaining challenge is that IPC Identifiers as implemented are insufficient
as an access control mechanism. Nothing is stops an application from crafting

> their own identifier value to refer attempt to refer to another process. This is

Reviewer 2: Typo fixes:

```suggestion
as an access control mechanism. Nothing stops an application from crafting
their own identifier value to refer to another process. This is
```
